Pets have been widely considered as a part of family throughout the world. They are domestic anmals and I will be providing my reasons in agreement with this idea that pets should be treated like family membersJust like human beings pets too are living beings and hence deserve to be treated with love and compassion just as we do with our family members. They do not expect anything in return. Imagine yourself on a day when you come home after a tiring day at work and there is no one to comfort you except your pet. As soon as you enter the house, your pet leaps on to you and this fills your heart with joy and you feel lively. Their mere presence makes you forget your work woes and enjoy the rest of the day.Furthermore, when your family members do not understand you, your pet does understand your mood and emotions. Despite being mute, they try to sympathis and cheer you by trying to get your attention to them by doing antic tricks, hugging or licking you.This one is from my personal experience. Just as family tries to protect one other from difficult situations or mishaps, your pet does the same for you. Like as we all know, dogs are loyal to their masters. This happened once with my family. It was late night and we could hear our pet dog barking continuously. We could not comprehend the situation and ran quickly to see the issue. It was that the main door of the house was left open unintentionally and a drunk mongrel was trying to enter the house with the intent of looting valuable items. My pet dog not only saved our house and lives but also instilled in me a sense of pride and respect for itself.There is a common myth among people that pets create too much nuisance in the family and do not deserve to be adopted. But I feel that instead of them wandering randomly on the roads as stray animal it would be better to adopt and treat the like family. This will ensure that they do not die due to dearth of food and water. It will also save their lives from the dangers of road accidents and other dangers.To end, I would like to reiterate and affirm my stand to treat pets like our own kith and kin. They love you unconditionally like parents. They do not expect anything rather save you from uncomfortable situations. Pets not only are living creatures that deserve to be treated with love but also will become so close to you that you will consider them as one of you.