World leaders shape the lives of people and make important contributions beneficial to the world and society. There have been many great leaders but my role model for a great world leader would be Narendra Modi.To begin with, Narendra Modi has not only transformed the economic profile of India form index of 78 to 61 as pointed out by the Economic Times but also brought several measures to enhance it and ensure that the poverty line is reduced to its lowest. The scheme of demonetisation by banning the old 500 and 1000 rupee notes introduced by him was a step ahead in this direction. This was a way which forced the black money dealers and handlers to abandon the illegal money used in smuggling, betting, terrorisma and other scams. It revolutionised the cash flow mechanism and promoted a future of digtal payments.In addition to this, Narendra Modi started a huge campaign to rejuvenate the Bharatiya Swachhata Movement which aimed at ensuring clean and green surroundings. Looking at the current climatic situation of the world owing to global warming and increased levels of pollution, spreading awareness for reducing waste and handle the non biogegradable waste was necessary. The carbon footprint idea was a huge success which imposed a heavy penalty on industries producing carbon dioxide beyond permissible levels has ensured to check the emmission levels.Modi has also ensured that the country is developing in terms of aestheic appeal and from tourism perspective. The great Sardar Vallabhai Patel statue was built under his guidance and is now a place of social, historical importance and is a go to tourist spot.The recent period wherein the entire world is witnessing a pandemic due to the Covid-19 virus, Narendra Modi has gone beoynd his capacity to ensure that safety measures are being followed strictly and there is no slack. This period when majority people are away from there loved ones and under depression, he made it a point to come live and speak to public motivating them to stay strong and give an assurance that everyone is together and this pandemic can be curbed soon. Vaccination drives are being carried out on large scale on a daily basis and along with that elderly and needy people are being provided home services and free ration supply.To conclude, I would like a world leader with the above mentioned qualities. Narendra Modi has far-sightedness and has touched each and every aspect of the country's situation tackling issues in the social, economic, environmental and psychological spheres of life.Shrey